income inequality is not a measure of
poverty to a remarkable extent the
measurements we now use that we call
measures of inequality are in fact
measures of wealth if we're going to go
through the numbers in just a moment but
the purpose of this video is to let you
know that the analysis of why people are
today rioting in the streets of Chile
they're badly misguided they're badly
misleading and I think they're mostly
just motivated by an urge to offer an
explanation that doesn't make any of us
feel bad
doesn't make any of us the audience feel
responsible doesn't make any of us ask
ourselves any tough questions Chile the
average hourly wage 2010 to present and
right there in the middle of the chart
you see it jumps up when the minimum
wage was increased then keeps on rising
thereafter the rate of unemployment 2008
to present it's about as healthy as it
gets in the year 2019 on the lower half
of the screen there you can compare
unemployment in Greece unemployment in
Spain unemployment in Italy if the
current violence in the streets were
explained by the struggles of the poor
robust growth in wages hmm pretty
healthy employment unemployment ratio
we're not gonna find the cause of why
people are burning and looting and
rioting in looking at these charts oh
and there's the most impressive chart of
all GDP per capita they don't have
burning and looting in the streets of
Italy they don't have burning and
looting in the streets of Greece if you
compare those two charts the chart we're
looking at for Chile is absolutely as
hopeful and optimistic as you could
possibly get poverty in Chile is a
problem but it maybe is easier
to point the finger at poverty or this
even more vague idea of inequality
easier than it is to talk about genocide
but what it means to have a country and
a culture built on genocide
the problem with Chile compared to other
countries in the region compared to
other countries going to look at as
examples in this video is not extreme
poverty and it's not extreme inequality
either one of the terrible knock-on
consequences of having a country built
on genocide is that even fairly mild
inequality is felt as an extreme
injustice and most of these countries
that have a history of genocide they
also have terrible education systems
education is crucial for upward social
mobility and creates class conflicts mm
another kind what are we looking at here
this might seem familiar to you if
you've been watching the TV news lately
if you've been reading the newspaper
thousands of people out in the streets
Chile policemen with armored vehicles
that look like tanks people throwing
things at the tanks and flags teargas
mm-hmm slogans these photographs are not
from the Year 2019 they're not from the
current riots
they're not from the current protests
they're from 2017 there's student riots
protesting the conditions and prices in
universities in Chile it happened in
2017 happened 2015 and the really large
riots as I recall were 2011
this is an ongoing tradition of tension
fundamentally premise not on economic
inequality not on wage inequality not an
inequality in earnings but the fact that
Chile has an education system that's too
expensive delivers too little value and
fails to provide people with forms of
upward mobility that really matter not
just for themselves but for society as a
whole in these conversations perhaps the
deeper point I want to get across in
this video inequality does not tell us
what we want to know here we are looking
at a chart of some of the countries with
the lowest Gini coefficients in the
world which is say these are countries
that have very little inequality or they
have better equality the best in the
world in fact you're look here's a
headline stating Ukraine ranks as the
world's most equal nation now when you
look at that chart how much does Ukraine
have in common with Switzerland or
Iceland
how much does Ukraine have in common
with Kazakhstan Malta Romania Germany
these are all clustered around the same
point on the chart these will have
similar Gini coefficients but inequality
does not measure poverty Ukraine may
well claim to be the most equal nation
in the world it's also one of the most
poverty stricken here's a headline for
you Ukrainian people still ranked among
the world's poorest study finds this
particular measurement of poverty and
some was limited in some ways flawed
measures Ukraine as being about as poor
as Bangladesh Kenya and Nepal why was it
that there were these riots in the
streets
year after year again and again over the
quality of education in the cost of
education in Chile there is in fact a
mechanistic economic explanation
the Ministry of Finance calculated the
cost of free tuition for all students at
two point one trillion Chilean pesos or
3.14 billion US dollars per year an
amount deemed unattainable given the
level of economic growth and tax revenue
at the time falling Bachelet selection
economic growth slowed to its lowest
level in years due largely to the sudden
drop in the price of copper which is a
significant source of Chilean tax
revenues there simply was not enough
revenue to make good in the promise of
free tuition at least not initially now
it isn't just the price of copper and I
did some research it isn't just the
price of copper that's the problem
Chilean copper exports are declining
because they're running out of copper
they still do have copper but it's
deeper and deeper or beneath the earth
the productivity of each labor goes down
and down they have to pay people to dig
more than a kilometer deep the days of
open-pit copper mining near the surface
are over and yes their economy really
was dependent on copper exports as you
can see not for such a long time but
they had a boom period for several years
with all that copper money coming in and
now the boom is over and it ended just
in time to cancel the plans to finally
reform their system of education in
response to the most violent and
memorable riots of this kind that were
as I mentioned 2011 feast with
reconciling the high cost of free
tuition and lower than expected
government revenues the Bachelet
government opted to pair the plan down
and phase it in more gradually a move
that ultimately allowed the government
to enact the policy starting in 2016
this version cost 518 billion Chilean
pesos or roughly 810 million US dollars
a fraction of the cost of her initial
campaign pledge the results of the
educational form were not a disaster but
they were disappointing
that disappointment is what's directly
fueling the protesters that are on the
streets today if you even just look at
the footage and look at the interviews
with people within the protest most of
them are University students most of
them are young people some of them are
high school students many of them will
be veterans of the prior riots in 2017
maybe some of the older ones veterans of
2011 that's not ancient history
meanwhile also pretty much every single
responsible website you're going to
consult on the problems that the
electoral system in Chile is facing will
discuss the divide between Chileans of
European ancestry and Chileans of
indigenous ancestry that's not quite the
same thing as social inequality that
shows up in these charts at all there is
indeed a rich and ongoing history of
riots from the Mapuche Indians from the
indigenous peoples or at least the
largest group of them there those riots
go on and on
year after year it's a very fundamental
contradiction in their society which is
in its own way a genocide of colonial
society it's a fundamental problem that
their electoral democracy cannot address
or at least so far it has utterly failed
to address when there are similar riots
in Muslim countries people are very
quick to talk about the religious roots
of why people are rioting or why people
are dissatisfied with their form of
government in Catholic countries in
Christian countries people don't want a
question their religious and cultural
context for why people are rioting is
that linked to the system of education
in my opinion yes yes it is I think in
the 21st century the fundamental
solution for countries like Canada the
United States and Chile countries built
on genocide of colonialism it has to
start with educational reform from the
ground up so when we look at Chile's
place on this chart the array of
countries with
different degrees of income inequality
as measured by the Gini coefficient what
can we really learn from this
as mentioned Ukraine has nothing in
common with Switzerland but they have
almost exactly the same ranking here
Ukraine is a poverty-stricken country
tragically so in a never-ending war that
they can't hope to win with the Russians
absolutely tragic situation do you want
to brag that Ukraine has some of the
best income equality in the world there
they have more economic equality than
for example Chile even though as
mentioned Chile is really losing its one
most profitable industry the export of
copper or copper mining do you have more
optimism about the future of the economy
of Chile or of the Ukraine in the next
five years I think anyone in their right
mind would say Chile including because
of the charts I already showed in this
video
very impressive economic numbers and the
last five years every reason to think
it'll continue to be strong in the next
five years and what can we say that
Chile has in common with the other
countries cluster next to Chile on the
chart Chile and Israel Chile in the
United States Chile and Mexico or Turkey
so these are all countries with similar
levels of income inequality do you
really think that the rioting on the
streets in Chile can be explained by
pointing to what Chile has in common
with the United States Israel and Turkey
I think people reach out for these
explanations because they're facile
because they're feel good because they
make us feel smart and virtuous they let
us look at these riots and think that
wouldn't happen to us because you live
in a country with for economic equality
they let us evade the really tough
questions and the current political
crisis in Chile raises very difficult
questions indeed that are relevant to
the United States
they're relevant to Canada they're
relevant to England the United Kingdom
these are three countries that have
expensive and very low value systems of
education in the case of Canada the
United States there are also countries
that have their own profound problems
with the separation of the religious in
the secular sphere their countries that
have profound problems that are rooted
in Christian cultural attitudes they're
invisible to us they could step back and
look at the situation Christianity has a
lot to do with it in the same way that
the politics of Lebanon right now Islam
has a lot to do with it right we don't
want to ask ourselves those questions
and above all else we don't want to ask
the questions about genocide of
indigenous people but the real weakness
of our democracies the real weakness of
our democratic institutions the profound
hypocrisy of our education system that's
built on that genocidal tradition this
weak imitation of Europe being sold you
know overpriced in a colonial country
there are really a lot of different
questions for us to ask ourselves here
including the question of whether or not
Bernie Sanders reformed for education
offering free tuition would work out any
better or any worse than chilles reform
in education because they promised free
tuition starting in 2016 it's because of
the failures of those reforms the less
than impressive results of those reforms
that right now the streets of Santiago
Chile people like to disrespect my truth
but the fact is that you know my name is
I don't know